CS 499 Portfolio 
-

Professional Self-Assessment
-
Throughout my Computer Science program, completing my coursework has helped me showcase my strengths in the form of my projects. My coursework has helped me shape my professional goals and values by giving me opportunities to hone my skills in software development as well as get a taste of what coding projects and tasks would be like in the working world. Finally, it has helped me become more employable in the computer science field by giving me opportunities to learn and develop skills that are in demand in the Computer Science field. 
Through my studies as a Computer Science major at Southern New Hampshire University, I have developed expertise and skills that I believe set me apart. In particular, the skills I have developed in information security and Agile methodology give me an edge in the field I am looking to enter, Cybersecurity. The information security skills I developed were vulnerability scanning, encryption, key signing, and vulnerability patching. These skills have helped me to both identify and fix insecurities in my own code as well as secure the websites that I have developed and hosted. The skills in Agile methodology helped me to gain familiarity in project management frameworks, which concern how programs are developed and released in increments in professional companies. 
Several classes I have taken in the past have allowed me to collaborate in a team environment. The major employable skills I have developed throughout my Computer Science degree are communicating with stakeholders, developing data structures, software engineering, managing databases, and ensuring program security. I have developed experience practicing my skills in communicating with stakeholders in the class CS 250. I was able to simulate developing a software application using Agile methodology and wrote reports to simulate routinely communicating with stakeholders. My expertise in developing data structures and using algorithms to accomplish tasks has also been developed throughout my computer science career. Work from classes such as CS 305 demonstrates how data structures are manipulated in my programs to perform specific functions for the user. My work and education in software development have proven to be beneficial in several different classes such as CS 465 and CS 320. In these classes, I developed web applications that could then be hosted online on a local port. My work with manipulating databases has been shown through my work in several different classes. Classes such as DAD 220 and CS 340 have helped me gain experience setting up databases using both SQL and CRUD functionality. Finally, my work in security can be seen in one particular class, CS320, and it is the highlight of my portfolio. This is due to my concentration in information security, which has prompted a more in-depth study of software vulnerabilities and patches.
My artifacts fit together and inform the portfolio as a whole by showcasing my growth in several different computer science topics. In particular, my artifacts demonstrate my growth in software development, security practices, and database management. They are supplemented with reflections that discuss the work I have completed. The technical artifacts included in my portfolio are the Animal Shelter program, the Contact Service, and the Encrypted Hash Website. Although the full range of my computer science talents and abilities cannot be expressed with just these three projects, these projects demonstrate skills such as software development and security best practices that are valued in Cybersecurity, the field I want to make my career. 


Artifact One - Encrypted Hash Website
-
Original Artifact:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1kFe4EL_h-xs7kcSoAF8cU0vS0eValeDg?usp=drive_link

Enhanced Artifact:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1JjiHVt0c_v8H-1FWo44J9Ay_2QKA5jUl?usp=sharing 

These enhancements will demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques to implement computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish software engineering goals. In particular, these enhancements are based off of practices suggested on the OWASP Secure Coding Practices website. This ensures that the techniques implemented are well-founded and have reputation and experience from a respected cybersecurity authority, OWASP, behind them to back them up. These enhancements will work to enhance the security of the website using OWASP Secure Coding Best Practices.
The first enhancement will be to consistently use HTTPS to ensure that no HTTP vulnerabilities are taken advantage of. This ensures enhanced privacy and security of data and resources, by creating an encrypted connection to the server website. SSL is a security protocol that uses an authentication process to encrypt data and ensure that it can only be read between the sender and recipient and cannot be intercepted by malicious third parties.
The second enhancement will be validating data length to ensure that malicious site hijacking that may alter the input data cannot cause any unexpected server behavior. By limiting the input size to a reasonable length, a malicious actor cannot use an overly long input to decrease the performance of the site by slowing it down or crashing it completely. 
The third enhancement will be ensuring that servers, frameworks, and system components of the code are running the latest approved versions to avoid including the vulnerabilities of old versions of software in the application. Old versions of servers, frameworks, and system components may have vulnerabilities in them that have already been patched by newer versions. Enforcing the up-to-date status of these resources protects the resources of my website from avoidable attacks on the vulnerabilities of outdated frameworks and system components.
The fourth enhancement will be to log all apparent tampering events, including unexpected changes to state data. This is to ensure that if malicious actors do manage to manipulate website data on the server end, such actions are logged by the system to detect attacks on the website. Once I am informed of an attack, I can then shut down my website as soon as possible to prevent further damage to it. I could afterward read the logs of the attack and use their details to file a criminal report so I can report the cyber attack on my website to the government. After that is done, I can use the information contained in the logs to analyze the vulnerabilities in my website code that were exploited and work to patch them. 


Artifact Two - Animal Shelter
-
Original Artifact:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1tgahogQNaSvFvWCugVJBWUD4nE_8QfcA?usp=drive_link

Enhanced Artifact:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Wy_tIiDPx5r1fapUkMty1sAvSYjW4-lH?usp=drive_link

This artifact is called the Animal Shelter. It is a website that allows users to view the different animals of an animal shelter and sort them by user-specified traits. In addition, it also has charts and a map to provide visual representations of animal data. This artifact was created for the CS 340 class. 
I selected this item to include in my ePortfolio because because I believe it is a strong example of the use of a database. Users can select different options to sort the entries in the database by their attributes, allowing them to access specific data within it that may be of interest. The specific components of my artifact that showcace my skills and abilities in software development are the table and the charts. These showcase my abilities by allowing users to organize the animals in terms of their attributes and see visual representations of their data. The artifact was improved by adding more graphs for the users to see the animals’ data as well as providing more options to sort the animals by their attributes and only see animals that have certain attributes. 
I did meet the course outcomes I planned to meet with this enhancement. The course outcomes I has planned to meet with this enhancement were to demonstrate an ability to use well-founded techniques, skills, and tools in computing pratices to accomplish industry-specific goals. The updates I have to my outcome-coverage plans are that I have included new charts and options for organizing the database to accomplish the goal of allowing users to sort and filter animals in the animal shelter database by their attributes. These updates give users more options on how they can sort the animals in the database and compare their data in the visual medium of charts.
The process of enhancing and modifying the artifact was fairly straightforward. First, I decided which enhancements I wanted to make to the website to improve its functionality. Next, I researched how to implement these functionalities, using websites such as Plotly. I then modified the program to include these functionalities. Finally, I recompiled the program to check my work and ensure that the new features were working as intended. 
As I was creating and improving my enhancement, I learned through the Plotly website how to implement different charts in Python. The main challenges I faced were implementing the new types of charts for the first time as well as recompiling the program on an online service. Sites like Plotly were useful in implementing the new charts, making this step only requiring a bit of research to get right. However, recompiling the program on an online service was a bit difficult. In the CS 340 class, I compiled the program using a desktop Jupyter notebooks application that was available on a virtual SNHU computer. Since I no longer have access to this virtual SNHU computer, I instead needed to figure out how to get the website running using the website version of Jupyter. I was eventually able to get the website up and running, but only after an amount of trial and error.

Artifact Three - Contact Service
-
Original Artifact:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1mjb0wZC5McPRe4xQaOwEqZLVjY3koTV0?usp=drive_link

Enhanced Artifact:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1WQnh2j6QvCdJfmJFGhHAahjLwr1eXhCo?usp=drive_link

This artifact is called ContactService. It is a program that serves as a digital contact-storing array service initially and is then polished to have the functionality to manipulate the contact-storing arrays as well. It was created for the CS320 class.
I decided to include this artifact because it is an easy-to-understand yet robust example of a Data Structure. It is simple enough to showcase the most basic functionality for an array such as adding, removing, and updating data, yet is tied enough into a real-life example of a contact rolodex for the average person to understand what it is. The tests and the different functions of the program showcase my skills and abilities in not so much algorithms, but rather data structures. The data structures are essentially collections of data objects that can be manipulated by users through the use of functions. The artifact was improved by adding the functionality to manipulate the ContactServices themselves by implementing the functionality to create and maintain a collection of ContactServices. 
I did meet the course outcomes I planned to meet with this enhancement in Module One. Mainly, I reached the course outcomes of designing computing solutions that manage trade-offs involved in design choices regarding data structures and the ability to use well-founded techniques to implement valuable computer solutions that accomplish goals. 
I do have updates to my outcome coverage plans. In particular, now that two out of three of my refinements are complete, I plan to meet with my professor to discuss further ways my refinements can be polished for the final submission. I want to make sure that all of my portfolio pieces are the best they can be and that I don’t overlook any areas for improvement. 
As I was enhancing and modifying the artifact, I learned to consider what kind of features a potential user would look for when using my application. I thought that although this software was complete on its own, it could use some tweaking to have more functionality. I thought that since users might have multiple lists of contacts in real life, my program should be altered to reflect this reality. The only real challenge I faced was figuring out what kind of functionality a potential user would be looking to get out of my project that it did not have before. The challenge I face in the future is obtaining and using feedback to determine how my project could be further polished. I need to work with my professor to polish this refinement further and determine if the current refinements I have made are enough for a final capstone portfolio submission. 

Code Review
-
Here is the link to my code review:
[https://youtu.be/B8u7QCf14s4]


